# Effect of long-acting beta-agonists on the frequency of COPD exacerbations: a meta-analysis

AUTHOR: Wang J  
AUTHOR: Nie B  
AUTHOR: Xiong W  

PubMedId:               21740451  
DOI:                    10.1111/j.1365-2710.2011.01285.x  
PaperUrl:               http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1365-2710.2011.01285.x/abstract  
IndexingStatus:         Subject indexing assigned by NLM  
AccessionNumber:        12012015431  
RecordPublished:	2012-10-18  
AbstractPublished:	2013-03-06  

MESH: Administration, Inhalation; Adrenergic beta-2 Receptor Agonists
/administration & Albuterol /administration & Bronchodilator Agents
/administration & Delayed-Action Preparations; Drug Therapy,
Combination; Ethanolamines /administration & Glucocorticoids
/administration & Humans; Indans /administration & Pulmonary Disease,
Chronic Obstructive /drug therapy /physiopathology; Quinolones
/administration & Randomized Controlled Trials as Topic; derivatives
/therapeutic use; dosage /analogs & dosage /pharmacology /therapeutic
use; dosage /therapeutic use; dosage /therapeutic use; dosage
/therapeutic use; dosage /therapeutic use; dosage /therapeutic use

CiteAs: Wang J, Nie B, Xiong W, Xu Effect of long-acting beta-agonists
on the frequency of COPD exacerbations: a meta-analysis. Journal of
Clinical Pharmacy and Therapeutics 2012; 37(2): 204-211

# SECTION: Searching and Selection

## CRD summary

This well-conducted review found that long-acting beta-agonists
reduced the frequency of moderate and severe exacerbations in patients
with stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Salmeterol,
formoterol and indacaterol each significantly reduced COPD
exacerbations compared with placebo.

## Authors' objectives

To evaluate the effect of long-acting beta-agonists on the frequency
of exacerbations in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD).

# SECTION: Searching and Selection

## Searching

MEDLINE, EMBASE, CINAHL and Cochrane Central Register of Controlled
Trials (CENTRAL) were searched to December 2010. Search terms were
reported. No language restrictions were applied. Bibliographies of
included studies and reviews were handsearched.

## Study selection

Randomised controlled trials (RCTs) that compared a long-acting beta
agonist with placebo in patients with stable COPD were eligible for
inclusion. Treatment had to last at least 24 weeks. Eligible trials
had to include at least 100 patients and report outcome data on
exacerbations. The primary outcome was moderate to severe COPD
exacerbations using a definition based on symptoms and
events. Moderate exacerbations were defined as those that required
treatment with antibiotics and/or systemic steroids; severe
exacerbations were defined as those that required hospitalisation.

The included trials were all double-blind and multicentre, and lasted
from six to 12 months. The mean age of included patients ranged from
60 to 65 years; the proportion of men ranged from 63% to 83% (where
reported). Mean forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1) ranged
from 36% to 56%. Most trials included patients who had been treated
with inhaled corticosteroids. Patients in the intervention group
received one of salmeterol 50μg twice daily, formoterol 9 to 24μg
twice daily, formoterol 9μg twice daily (plus 4.5μg as needed), or
indacaterol 150μg to 600μg four times daily.

Two reviewers independently selected trials.

## Assessment of study quality

Quality was assessed using the Cochrane risk of bias tool, which rated
each trial as adequate, inadequate or unclear based on the following
domains: sequence generation, allocation concealment, blinding,
addressing incomplete outcome data, free of selective reporting, free
of other bias.

The authors did not state how many reviewers performed the quality
assessment.

## Data extraction

Data were extracted to allow the calculation of odds ratios with 95%
confidence intervals. Trial authors were contacted to obtain missing
data, where needed.

Two reviewers independently extracted the data; it was not clear how
disagreements were resolved.

## Methods of synthesis

Data were pooled using fixed-effect meta-analysis where the results
appeared to be homogenous, and random-effects meta-analysis in the
presence of statistical heterogeneity. Heterogeneity was investigated
by using the Q statistic and Ι². Ι² values indicated low (<25%),
moderate (25% to 75%) and high (>75%) degrees of inconsistency.

Stratified analyses were performed by each long-acting beta-agonist
and by exposure to inhaled corticosteroids. Sensitivity analyses to
test the robustness of the meta-analyses were conducted by excluding
individual trials sequentially.

Funnel plots and Egger's weighted regression test were used to
investigate publication bias

## Results of the review

Seventeen RCTs (11,871 patients) were included in the review. The
overall risk of bias was relatively low in most trials. Two trials
were judged to be at high risk of bias for blinding. For allocation
concealment and other sources of bias, the risk of bias was unclear
for many trials.

Long-acting beta-agonists had a beneficial effect on chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) exacerbations compared with
placebo (OR 0.81, 95% CI 0.75 to 0.88; Ι²=0%; 18 RCTs). The results
for each drug (salmeterol, formoterol and indacaterol) compared with
placebo were similar to the overall pooled result.

When results were stratified according to whether patients were
treated with inhaled corticosteroids or not, salmeterol was equally
effective in those treated and not treated compared with
placebo. Formoterol was more beneficial than placebo in trials of
patients treated with inhaled corticosteroids, but not better than
placebo in trials of patients not treated with inhaled
corticosteroids. There were no trials of patients treated with
indacaterol but not treated with inhaled corticosteroids.

Long-acting beta-agonists had a beneficial effect on severe COPD
exacerbations or withdrawals owing to exacerbations compared with
placebo (OR 0.74, 95% CI 0.63 to 0.88; Ι²=4%; 16 RCTs). When
stratified by drug, the effect was evident for salmeterol (OR 0.66,
95%CI 0.49 to 0.89; Ι²=0%; seven RCTs) and indacaterol (OR 0.42, 95%
CI 0.21 to 0.83; Ι²=23%; two RCTs), but was not statistically
significant for formoterol (OR 0.85, 95% CI 0.68 to 1.06; Ι²=0%; seven
RCTs).

For all long-acting beta-agonists compared with placebo, the effect on
severe COPD exacerbations or withdrawals owing to exacerbations was
evident in patients who used inhaled corticosteroids (OR 0.68, 95% CI
0.52 to 0.89; Ι²=0%) and those who did not (OR 0.79, 95% CI 0.63 to
0.99; Ι²=25%). When these analyses were further stratified by drug,
the only significant effects were in patients taking indacaterol and
inhaled corticosteroids (OR 0.42, 95% CI 0.21 to 0.83; Ι²=23%) and in
those taking salmeterol but not inhaled corticosteroids (OR 0.48, 95%
CI 0.29 to 0.81; Ι²=0%).

Sensitivity analysis showed the meta-analyses was robust to excluding
individual studies sequentially.

Funnel plots and Egger's test showed not evidence of publication bias
for COPD exacerbations, but there was evidence of publication bias for
severe exacerbations or withdrawals owing to exacerbations (Egger’s
bias value -2.36, 95% CI -2.83 to -0.13).

## Authors' conclusions

Long-acting beta-agonists reduced the frequency of exacerbations in
patients with stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD). Salmeterol, formoterol and indacaterol each significantly
reduced COPD exacerbations compared with placebo. Salmeterol, but not
formoterol, decreased exacerbations in patients who had not been
treated with inhaled corticosteroids.

# SECTION: Commentary

## CRD commentary

The review question was clear. Participant, intervention, design and
outcome criteria were clear and appropriate. The search covered
several sources, with no language restrictions. Steps were taken to
reduce error and bias during the search and data extraction, but it
was not clear whether this was also the case for the quality
assessment.

The risk of bias assessment was appropriate, as was the
meta-analysis. The authors were careful to ensure relatively
homogenous patients were included; the outcomes were also
homogenous. For the analyses of severe exacerbations, there was
evidence of publication bias. The authors acknowledged that some of
the lack of effect seen in the stratified analyses of severe
exacerbations could have been due to low statistical power.

The authors' conclusions reflected the evidence presented, but because
of potential publication bias, the conclusions regarding severe
exacerbations should be considered tentative.

## Implications of the review for practice and research

### Practice

The authors did not state any implications for practice.

### Research

The authors stated that more large clinical trials with exacerbations
as primary outcomes were required to confirm the effect of Long-acting
beta-agonists on exacerbations.

# SECTION: Status

## Funding

Not stated

## Record Status

This is a critical abstract of a systematic review that meets the
criteria for inclusion on DARE. Each critical abstract contains a
brief summary of the review methods, results and conclusions followed
by a detailed critical assessment on the reliability of the review and
the conclusions drawn.